Alright. So, let's talk about Testing Invariants by Using Assertions.
So, I want to start with two definitions.
Invariant:  An invariant is a property of an object
which remains unchanged even after operations are applied to the object.
Assertion: An assertion is an expression
that evaluates to true or false at a specific point in the program
which should by default evaluate to true unless there's an error in the code.
An assertion in Java is a statement
that enables you to test your assumptions about your program.
The benefits of using assertions are two-fold.
Firstly, to detect and fix bugs. Secondly, to
document assumptions the developer has made about the use of the code.
So, assertions are either enabled usually in a development environment, or while troubleshooting,
or disabled.
Because the expression in an assert statement may have overhead and
can affect the performance of an application,
they are disabled by default.
Assertions should be designed to have no cost when disabled.
The last is a principle, and obviously, cannot be guaranteed.
If you're coding for assertions, creating objects that only assert statements might
query for example, this is a violation of that principle.
Assertions should not be designed to affect the outcome of your application logic.
You have some control over the granularity of which assertions
are enabled and disabled.
You can also force the class to not load altogether if assertions are disabled.
And I'll show you an example of that in this video.
Let's have a look at the Java language specification for assertions.
The link to this is in the resources section of the video.
So, an assertion can take the form of an assert statement which has two forms
as described on this page.
So, swinging back to the slides, the first form,assert expression one
that represents a boolean expression followed by semicolon,
alternatively, there's a second form which is the same as the first one,
assert expression one but this time, there's a colon in expression two.
Expression two usually represents an error message,
so if this is a value other than a string, the two string method
will be used and a void method here is invalid as we'll see in code shortly.
If expression one evaluates to false, and assertions are enabled,
an assertion error is thrown using expression 2 if it's declared
for a detailed message.
Note that expression 2 can be a method
as long as the method's return type is not void and we'll test this in this video as well.
Alright. So, let's swing back and test some code here.
So, we'll start off by creating a new class.
Now we'll call this one Assertion Example,
but we'll actually put it in the assertion package,
so assertion.AssertionExample.
Now paste some code in.
This code is demonstrating that a byte can overflow
if using a bytecast on a short value.
You can see what we're doing there in line 15.
Firstly, to set the value, we've got an assert statement there, but then on line 21,
we're casting short to a byte which could lead to an undetected overflow.
So, specifically, the assert on line 18
is checking that the value stored in the short is in the valid byte range
before it's cast back to a byte on line 21. If we run this code,
clearly it overflowed, so what good was that assert statement the one on line 18?
In java, assertions are not automatically enabled,
so there's two ways to enable assertions.
You can either execute the code from the command line, and pass a flag,
dash enable assertions or you can do it in the IDE.
So, what I'm going to do first is show you how to do it from the command line,
and then for the rest of the video, we'll go through and just do it in the IDE.
So, what I'm going to do is open the project pane and open the folder, containing our code.
Go to the ExceptionHandling folder, right-click and Open in Terminal,
and from there I'm going to type ‘Java –
enableassertions’.
So, dash enable assertions, then the name of our class which is an
assertion package,so assertion.AssertionExample.
And yes, you can obviously, see that was a single dash for enable assertions and not a double dash,
so the output confirms that we've got now an assertion error showing on screen.
That's happened, of course, because looking at our assertion statement,
we're looking for to make sure that the max value for our short is within the range
of a byte,
it clearly gets outside of that because we've added one to the maximum value for a byte.
That's why the assertion was raised, you can see that it was raised on line 18.
Alright, so, let's do the same thing back with the IDE.
To do that, we just come up here to our configuration to run.
And for our AssertionExample,
we're going to add a VM option -ea.
ea is the abbreviated version.
You could type -enableassertions if you wanted to.
Click OK.
And now, if we run it in the IDE.
This time, we've now got the assertion being raised again on line 18.
Alright. So, let's change the assert statement on line 18 to show the second form.
The moment we've got the first form there, we'd come back here, and we'll put a colon
at the end of the line before the semicolon.
Then on the next line as a string,
“Value out of range for a byte”.
So, here, I've just simply added a message, which will be included in the assertion
error message. We'll run this to confirm that in the output pane.
And you can see the output is now showing value out of range for a byte.
Alright, so let's test some other things now.
I'm going to go back up to the top of the class here,
and paste in some code
directly below the declaration of our class on line 9.
So, with this code, you can see we're using an enum to maintain detailed messages,
assertion errors.
So, this contains known errors with error messages. And also below that,
I’ve got getAssertMessage which is a method
which returns the message of a known error using the assert flags item.
So, if we go back to our assert statement here on line 18,
let's change this now, the second part of the expression.
This time we'll do getAssertMessage
(assertFlags.BYTE_OUT_OF_RANGE).
If you run this now,
you can see you've got the output.
And there's the output on line 24 from making assertion message.
And you can see it in the output pane there,
Method returns value is out of range for a byte.
Alright.
So, let's try something slightly different. Just below the getAssertionMessage method,
I'm going to paste in another method here.
You can see that the method I've pasted in is very similar to the getAssertMessage
except it's printIn message and has a void return type this time.
I go back to our assert, let's change the getAssertMessage to,
instead call our printAssertMessage method.
By doing that, you can see we've got a compiler-error there,
if I hover over that, void type is not allowed here.
So, that confirms that you cannot use a method with a void return type
as the second part of the assertion expression.
So, let's change this code again now.
And what we can do is just remove the right parentheses, and delete everything,
including from the start of the line to the assertFlags.
So, here as you can see, I'm just using the assertFlag item
as the second part of the assert expression.
And we haven't got a compiler-error, so if we run this,
this time we get the output, or output added to the AssertionError
BYTE_OUT_OF_RANGE.
So, this exercise has demonstrated that the second part of the assert statement
can be any object or any method with the only exception,
being a method with a void return type, which doesn't work.
You can also use primitive data
or methods that return primitive data.
They'll be auto-boxed to their corresponding wrapper.
The other thing I want to show you before we end the video
is how to disable a class from executing entirely,
if assertions are disabled.
To do that, we need to add a static initializer to our class.
So, I'm going to add that right below the declaration.
You can see what we're doing there, we're setting startupAllowed to false on line 12.
And we're doing an assert to set startup allowed to true,
and startupAllowed will be true only if assertions are enabled,
otherwise the statement is simply ignored as we've seen previously in this video.
Then we've got some code on line 19,
which is checking if startupAllowed is false.
Then we're throwing a RuntimeException with the error that Assertions must be enabled.
Now, obviously, if we run this code at the moment,
it'll still work, and the reason for that is assertions
are actually enabled. So, we go back now and change our
configuration,
remove that options, so now assertions are not enabled.
If we run this, we should find the class, in fact won't load.
And you can see that, that was the case I've got a RuntimeException
assertions must be enabled and that's prevented the class from loading altogether.
Alright. So, let's end the video here.
In the next one, I want to start by talking about when it's appropriate
to use assertions.
See you in the next video.